Mackenzie King
Coursework

Adaptation and Professional Rehabilitation of the Blind in the Soviet Union

The history of the development of social adaptation of people with disabilities is a new and developing field in academia, but remains insufficiently studied. In my view, it is necessary to study issues concerning minorities – in our work, these are people with disabilities – in order to better understand our past and thereby improve social and labor policies with respect to disabled persons today and in the future. Furthermore, disabled persons constitute the most numerous minority in the world, finding themselves in the most disadvantaged position. The figures cited in the publication "From Social Isolation to Equality: Realization of the Rights of Disabled Persons" are staggering: 20% of the poorest people in the world are disabled, 98% of disabled children in developing countries do not attend school, approximately one third of homeless children are disabled, and the literacy rate among adult disabled persons in some countries is 3%, and 1% among women. Every society must find ways to allow people with disabilities to live with equal dignity and feel equal to other people, to be full members of our society.

"The Fight Against Discrimination Against Disabled Persons." [Illegible – possibly a reference number or internal code].


“He who does not work, neither shall he eat” was considered an important principle of socialism in the Soviet Union. However, this statement, made by Lenin, was not directed at the bourgeois class, but at those who were physically unable to work, due to old age or disability. Nevertheless, the social norm in the Soviet Union was a “working society.”

People in the Soviet Union lived with the dream of an “ideal” world, according to ideology. The creation of a new image of man, the “Soviet man,” was considered an important step on the path to communism. However, as in any society, there were those who were born with limited physical abilities or those who became disabled due to illness, war, or accident. What can and should be done with this part of society?

At the beginning of my research into this topic, I was convinced that [illegible – possibly: the focus was on] limited physical abilities. But the more I worked, the more I understood that this was not isolation, but the creation of united communities in which both disabled and physically healthy people lived and worked side-by-side.

In the USSR, the community of the blind was the most successful in finding ways to live with dignity and the opportunity to work and study. In my work, I will discuss the socio-labor adaptation of blind people in the USSR in the period after the Second World War. There are many types of disability, and each type has undergone and is undergoing its own path of social and professional adaptation. Although the adaptation and rehabilitation of the blind cannot be an indicator for all people with disabilities in the Soviet Union, nevertheless, I will focus on the general policy:

[Illegible – possibly a citation or reference number].


of the Soviet government in relation to people with limited physical abilities.

In 1932, a classification of disability was introduced to divide "disabled persons" into three groups, primarily based on the calculation of work capacity. These categories are still used to denote disability status in modern Ukraine and Russia. Group I includes those considered unable to work and requiring constant care; Group II includes those who do not require constant nursing care, or those who have lost the ability to work but can work under special conditions; people in Group III are those who have lost the ability to work but can work part-time or temporarily.

[Illegible – possibly continuation of the text or a diagram].

The All-Russian Society of the Blind (VOS) was founded on April 6, 1925, in Moscow.  At that time, Russia had 472,000 registered blind individuals; a vast majority, 90 percent, were unable to work.  Immediately, the VOS organized courses to teach the blind Braille.  Furthermore, the VOS began publishing a socio-political and literary-artistic journal, “Life of the Blind,” which became the official publication of the Central Council, VOS. The journal was printed in Braille; its first issue appeared in 1924. During the 1920s and 1930s, the VOS created various worker cooperatives for the blind.  I, however, will focus my work on the post-war period.

The VII Congress of the VOS (1947) set the goal of attracting war-blinded individuals to the Society's enterprises, as well as establishing at least one model enterprise in each major city. A large number of blind people lived in rural areas. Therefore, to attract them to enterprises, the VIII Congress of the Society, held in November 1951, decided to build residential houses and dormitories. In the same 1951, the Council of Ministers of the USSR adopted a resolution on the construction of 10 enterprise-internates for the All-Russian Society of the Blind, each with a capacity of 100 people.  At the beginning of the 1950s, the All-Russian Society of the Blind became financially stronger.

The All-Russian Society of the Blind often relied on government assistance to survive. Nevertheless, it always existed separately from the government and continues to exist to this day. The VOS was the primary source of improvement in the lives of the blind in the Soviet Union. The government allowed this organization to operate, and therefore, it managed to help the population. However, not all people with disabilities in the Soviet Union could receive assistance from this well-funded organization.


6.114.
71а
8 11а


RUSINOVO

One example of such a separate settlement for the visually impaired was Rusinovo, a unique village (now a street within the settlement of Yermolino) located near Moscow in the Kaluga Oblast. In 1948, the Borovsk Training and Production Enterprise (UPP) of the All-Russian Society of the Blind (VOS) was established in Rusinovo. Although Rusinovo is called the "city of the blind," the visually impaired never constituted a majority there. In the 1960s, there were more than a thousand visually impaired people, but also many able-bodied people. Even at the factory, only slightly more than half of all workers were blind. There was a specialized library with audio cassettes and Braille books. People who moved there were attracted by high salaries and the opportunity to obtain housing.


[Citation referencing an article about Rusinovo, possibly detailing its history and current state]


Initially, about 200 people worked at the factory, producing simple goods that did not require complex equipment, but only dexterity. The factory director, Vasily Sergeyevich Tarantasov, a World War II veteran, approached the All-Russian Society of the Blind with a proposal to build a new building – larger, more modern, with good machinery. Tarantasov's risky proposal was accepted, despite the fact that enterprises for the blind, according to VOS rules, were self-sufficient and also contributed a portion of their profits to the Society of the Blind.  In its best times under Tarantasov's management, the enterprise employed 1100 workers.

Rusinovo was not a place of isolation, not a settlement; rather, it was a rational arrangement for the disabled within a localized space, where the blind ‘could move independently – handrails, a lift, and special traffic lights were built for them. People went there willingly, of their own accord, without any coercion.

Now, after the collapse of the Soviet ‘Union, the factory is on the brink of survival.  Very few blind people remain in Rusinovo now: the salaries there are very small, therefore many travel to work in Moscow or Kaluga, and many have moved to other cities to be with their children and grandchildren!2.  In addition, the Rusinovo blind are aging. Those who came to work in the 1950s-1960s are now reaching the end of their lives. Therefore, there are few young blind people in Rusinovo. Congenital blindness is not so common; mainly, sight is lost as a result of serious illness or injuries!3. So blindness was hardly hereditary. The dream of Rusinovo is gone. Rusinovo was not the only Soviet city for the blind. There is also a city in Latvia, Strasdimuza, which went through the same process as Rusinovo. At the factory in Strasdimuza, more than 800 visually impaired people worked in the 50s and 60s!4. Now this number has been reduced to two blind employees. More than 90% of the blind population is unemployed!5.


UVP in Moscow

After the war, the question of rehabilitation for the visually impaired became acute, therefore UVPs – educational and production enterprises – appeared, so that the disabled could feel like full members of society. It was clear that they ‘needed to work. The UVP that I visited was established in 1948. Its full name is LLC “Moscow Educational and Production Enterprise No. 13 of the All-Union Society of the Blind” (OOO «Moskovskoe uchebno-proizvodstvennoe predpriyatie №13 VOS»). It used to occupy a basement, and only in 1962 did it move to the buildings that are now located on Lyublinskaya Street, Maryino metro station15. The General Director is Chupin Anatoliy Stepanovich; he has worked there since 1979. Having met Anatoliy Stepanovich and seeing how he treats the workers, with what pride he spoke of his enterprise, I understood that he has created a real second home for the blind who work at the UVP. Currently, 650 people work at the enterprise, and of them – 52% are blind!7. Now the percentage of blind and visually impaired people is very small compared to the 60s and 70s. This is explained by the natural passing away of war invalids.


I had the honor of meeting Viktor Alekseevich Uspensky – a first-group visually impaired person. He graduated from a special school for the blind and immediately began working at this enterprise. He believes that the golden age was the 60s. He was a very kind person and very proud of the factory. He told me how visually impaired people are limited in movement and convenient transportation to their workplace. He spoke with nostalgia about the society in which he lived, about the surrounding area where he and his colleagues lived, and others like him received many advantages. For example, the enterprise was subsidized. There were pioneer camps, enhanced nutrition for employees, and provision of apartments; although preferences were given to the blind.

Through the All-Union Society of the Blind (VOS) and the Soviet government, the visually impaired population was given the opportunity to live comfortably and find employment.  The peak of this era was in the 1950s and 60s, when so many resources were used to create places where blind people could work and live. These programs were important in Soviet policy, where the government succeeded in providing equal opportunities to those in need, with vital assistance from the VOS. However, such organizations supporting the blind faced difficulties transitioning to the post-Soviet world. The same policies that were so beneficial earlier had created a society not yet ready for the integration of blind citizens.

When I chose the topic of disability in the Soviet Union, I knew I should select a more specific aspect. I chose visual impairment because it is easier to classify. However, this also creates problems. Almost everyone I spoke with commented on how well people with disabilities lived in the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, when they speak of people with disabilities, they are actually only talking about blind people. Blindness is easy to understand, and one feels relatively comfortable around a blind person. We know what can be done to help blind people. However, there are many other types of disabilities, both physical and mental. People with other physical impairments received nothing from any organization like the VOS. The stories they tell are very different from the stories I found while researching the lives of the blind in the Soviet Union. Why am I mentioning this? After all, my article is not about all disabled people, but only about the visually impaired.

Nevertheless, I cannot discuss the lives of the blind without mentioning that they were an exception. I do not believe that disabled people suffered in the USSR due to ideological reasons, as the USA struggled with the same problems during the same period.

I am American, so people want to assure me that life in the USSR was comfortable. In principle, I agree with them. However, there were many cases where people were invisible; for example, people with disabilities were hidden with relatives, and children were abandoned and sent to orphanages. In researching this topic, I realized that these other stories greatly interest me. My work on the professional adaptation of the blind in the Soviet Union shows how well the lives of disabled people can be improved thanks to the resources of a financially strong organization. I hope to continue my research into the history of disabled people who were unable to benefit from such resources.


Bibliography

[Illegible – appears to be a list of bibliographic entries, possibly in a non-standard format.  The entries appear to be in Russian and include titles, authors, journal names, and publication dates.  Further clarification is needed to accurately translate.]


[Illegible – likely more bibliographic entries]

The provided text appears to be a bibliography or list of sources, not a KGB document.  The formatting and inclusion of publication dates from 2004, 2005, 2008, and 2009 strongly suggest it is not from May 1984.  The references are to books and articles about blindness, not typical subject matter for a classified KGB document.

However, I will translate the provided text as accurately as possible, marking illegible sections:


Khoroshilova, Tatyana. "City of the Blind." *Rossiyskaya Gazeta*, [Date illegible]/2005/11/18/[illegible].

Eidel, Yulia. "The City of the Blind in the Country of the Seeing – A Journey to Rusinovo with Open Eyes." *Chastny Korrespondent*, [Date illegible] 22, 2009 [illegible].  <URL illegible>.

Yarskaya, E.R. *Social Work with Disabled People*. Piter, Russia: SPb, 2004.


The illegible sections are likely publication details (dates, page numbers, URLs) and possibly some internal referencing.  There is no indication of classified information or KGB involvement.  The references are to readily available publications on social work and disability.